It is obvious Turgenev felt that after a tragedy must follow a farce,
and therein lies the substance of his philosophy. It is also obvious
that in this feeling he has the whole of European civilisation behind
him. Turgenev was the most educated, the most cultured of all Russian
writers. He spent nearly all his life abroad, and absorbed into himself
all that European learning could offer. He knew this, although he never
directly admitted it, owing to an exaggerated modesty which sometimes
irritates us by its obviousness. He believed profoundly that only
learning, only European science could open men's eyes to life, and
explain all that needed explanation. According to this belief he judges
even Tolstoy. "The saddest instance of the lack of real freedom," the
sixty-year-old Turgenev writes _of War and Peace_, in his literary
memoirs: "the saddest instance of the lack of real freedom, arising
from the lack of real knowledge, is revealed to us in Leo Tolstoy's
latest work, a work which at the same time, by virtue of its creative,
poetic force, ranks almost first among all that has appeared in
Russian literature since 1840. No! without culture, without freedom in
the widest sense, freedom within oneself, freedom from preconceived
ideas, freedom with regard to one's own nation and history, without
this, the real artist is unthinkable; without this free air he cannot
breathe." Listening to Turgenev one might imagine that he had learned
some great secret in the West, a secret which gave him the right to
bear himself cheerfully and modestly when other people despaired and
lost their heads.... A year after the writing of the literary memoirs
above quoted, Turgenev happened to be present at the execution of the
notorious murderer, Tropman. His impressions are superbly rendered in a
long article called "Tropman's Execution." The description produces a
soul-shaking effect upon the reader; for I think I shall not exaggerate
if I say that the essay is one of the best, at least one of the most
vigorous of Turgenev's writings. It is true that Tolstoy describes
scenes of slaughter with no less vigour, and therefore the reader need
not yield too much to the artist's power. Yet when Turgenev relates
that, at the decisive moment, when the executioners like spiders on
a fly threw themselves on Tropman and bore him to the ground--"the
earth quietly swam away from under my feet"--we are forced to believe
him. Men respond only faintly to the horrors that take place around
them, except at moments, when the savage, crying incongruity and
ghastliness of our condition suddenly reveals itself vivid before our
eyes, and we are forced to know what we are. Then the ground slides
away from under our feet. But not for long. The horror of the sensation
of groundlessness quickly brings man to himself. He must forget
everything, he must only get his feet on earth again. In this sense
Turgenev proved himself in as risky a state at sixty as he was when, as
a young man, he wrote his _Diary of a Superfluous Man._ The description
of Tropman's execution ends with these words: "Who can fail to feel
that the question of capital punishment is one of the urgent, immediate
problems which modern humanity must settle? I shall be satisfied ...
if my story will provide even a few arguments for those who advocate
the abolition, or at least the suppression of the publicity of capital
punishments." Again the mountain has brought forth a mouse. After
a tragedy, a farce. Philosophy enters into her power, and the earth
returns under one's feet.

I emphasise and repeat: Turgenev is not alone responsible for his
attitude. With his lips speaks the whole of European civilisation. On
principle all insoluble problems are rejected. During her thousand
years of experience, the old civilisation has acquired the skill which
allows her children to derive satisfaction and benefit out of anything,
even the blood of their neighbour. Even the greatest horrors, even
crimes are beneficial, properly construed. Turgenev was, as we know,
a soft, "humane" man, an undoubted idealist. In his youth he had been
through the Hegelian school. And from Hegel he learned what an enormous
value education has, and how supremely important it is for an educated
man to have a complete and finished--most certainly a "finished"
philosophy.